README.md, before:

# Ensembl public databases

Typically one wouldn't need to delve into the innards of the [Ensembl public MySQL Servers](https://www.ensembl.org/info/data/mysql.html?redirect=no) because it's much easier to use Biomart. It also requires understanding the [database schema](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/api/core/core_schema.html), which is not that straightforward. However, Biomart is sometimes unreachable and/or does not work as expected. A deeper understanding of the Ensembl public databases can help in those cases since we can directly retrieve the data we want from the databases. Given my reliance on Ensembl, it is a worthwhile endeavour to try to understand the backend of Ensembl.

# Setup

On Debian 12, I wasn't sure which package to install so I made an initial search.

```console
sudo apt update
sudo apt search mysql > blah

# after looking through blah
sudo apt install -y default-mysql-client
mysql --version
```
```
mysql  Ver 15.1 Distrib 10.11.13-MariaDB, for debian-linux-gnu (x86_64) using  EditLine wrapper
```

In case you were wondering about the compatibility between MariaDB and MySQL, at least the [client protocol](https://mariadb.com/docs/release-notes/compatibility-and-differences/mariadb-vs-mysql-compatibility) is binary compatible.

Get all the databases as a test.

```console
mysql --user=anonymous --host=ensembldb.ensembl.org -A -e "show databases;" > ensembldb_databases.txt
cat ensembldb_databases.txt| wc -l
```
```
24290
```

# Rattus norvegicus

This work was motivated by the fact that the Ensembl version 113 archive does not contain rat references, which means I can't use Biomart. Looking through `ensembldb_databases.txt`, the database I need is `rattus_norvegicus_core_113_72`. I need a single lookup table that connects Ensembl gene IDs with their associated Gene Ontology terms. Looking through the schema, it seems the table that I need is [ontology_xref](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/api/core/core_schema.html#ontology_xref).

* This table associates Evidence Tags to the relationship between EnsEMBL objects and ontology accessions (primarily GO accessions).
* The relationship to GO that is stored in the database is actually derived through the relationship of EnsEMBL peptides to SwissProt peptides, i.e. the relationship is derived like this: ENSP -> SWISSPROT -> GO And the evidence tag describes the relationship between the SwissProt Peptide and the GO entry.
* In reality, however, we store this in the database like this: ENSP -> SWISSPROT ENSP -> GO and the evidence tag hangs off of the relationship between the ENSP and the GO identifier.
* Some ENSPs are associated with multiple closely related Swissprot entries which may both be associated with the same GO identifier but with different evidence tags.
* For this reason a single Ensembl - external db object relationship in the object_xref table can be associated with multiple evidence tags in the ontology_xref table.

```console
mysql --user=anonymous --host=ensembldb.ensembl.org -A
```
```mysql
use rattus_norvegicus_core_113_72;
select * from ontology_xref limit 5;
```
```
+----------------+----------------+--------------+
| object_xref_id | source_xref_id | linkage_type |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+
|       11895259 |        4650749 | IDA          |
|       11895260 |        4650749 | IEA          |
|       11895261 |        4646135 | IEA          |
|       11895262 |        4646135 | IEA          |
|       11895263 |        4653274 | IEA          |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+
5 rows in set (0.868 sec)
```

* `object_xref_id` - Composite key. Foreign key references to the `object_xref` table.
* `source_xref_id` - Composite key. Foreign key references to the `xref` table.

Join with `object_xref`.

```mysql
select * from ontology_xref join object_xref on ontology_xref.object_xref_id = object_xref.object_xref_id limit 5;
```
```
+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+------------+---------------------+---------+--------------------+-------------+
| object_xref_id | source_xref_id | linkage_type | object_xref_id | ensembl_id | ensembl_object_type | xref_id | linkage_annotation | analysis_id |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+------------+---------------------+---------+--------------------+-------------+
|       11895259 |        4650749 | IDA          |       11895259 |      36056 | Transcript          |  861201 | IDA                |         153 |
|       11895260 |        4650749 | IEA          |       11895260 |      36056 | Transcript          | 1711926 | IEA                |         153 |
|       11895261 |        4646135 | IEA          |       11895261 |       1754 | Transcript          | 1711880 | IEA                |         153 |
|       11895262 |        4646135 | IEA          |       11895262 |       1754 | Transcript          | 1711881 | IEA                |         153 |
|       11895263 |        4653274 | IEA          |       11895263 |      54956 | Transcript          | 1711882 | IEA                |         153 |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+------------+---------------------+---------+--------------------+-------------+
5 rows in set (0.282 sec)
```

Join with `xref`.

```mysql
select * from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id limit 5;
```
```
+----------------+----------------+--------------+---------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
| object_xref_id | source_xref_id | linkage_type | xref_id | external_db_id | dbprimary_acc | display_label | version | description | info_type | info_text |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+---------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
|       11895259 |        4650749 | IDA          | 4650749 |          50817 | URS0000013967 | URS0000013967 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
|       11895260 |        4650749 | IEA          | 4650749 |          50817 | URS0000013967 | URS0000013967 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
|       11895261 |        4646135 | IEA          | 4646135 |          50817 | URS0000060CC3 | URS0000060CC3 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
|       11895262 |        4646135 | IEA          | 4646135 |          50817 | URS0000060CC3 | URS0000060CC3 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
|       11895263 |        4653274 | IEA          | 4653274 |          50817 | URS000007B8A8 | URS000007B8A8 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+---------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
5 rows in set (0.367 sec)
```

I'm not familiar with `URS` IDs, let's check the `external_db` table to see what they are.

```mysql
select * from external_db where external_db_id = 50817;
```
```
+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------+
| external_db_id | db_name    | db_release | status    | priority | db_display_name | type               | secondary_db_name | secondary_db_table | description                         |
+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------+
|          50817 | RNAcentral | NULL       | KNOWNXREF |        0 | RNAcentral      | PRIMARY_DB_SYNONYM | NULL              | NULL               | Sequence identity to RNAcentral ids |
+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------+
1 row in set (0.310 sec)
```

Looking online I found [RNAcentral: The non-coding RNA sequence database](https://rnacentral.org/); let's tally all the external databases.

First count all entries (as I'm not confident with my SQL skills).

```mysql
select count(*) as total from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id;
```
```
+--------+
| total  |
+--------+
| 164031 |
+--------+
1 row in set (0.292 sec)
```

Tally.

```mysql
select xref.external_db_id, count(xref.external_db_id) as total from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id group by xref.external_db_id;
```
```
+----------------+-------+
| external_db_id | total |
+----------------+-------+
|           2000 |  6109 |
|           2200 |  7996 |
|           2250 | 76238 |
|          50621 | 62300 |
|          50817 | 11244 |
|          50869 |   144 |
+----------------+-------+
6 rows in set (0.345 sec)
```

Double-check the total.

```console
echo $(( 6109+7996+76238+62300+11244+144 ))
```
```
164031
```

Join on `external_db` so we have the actual names of the databases.

```mysql
select external_db.db_display_name, count(external_db.db_display_name) as total from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id join external_db on xref.external_db_id = external_db.external_db_id group by external_db.external_db_id;
```
```
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------+
| db_display_name                                                             | total |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------+
| UniProtKB/TrEMBL                                                            |  6109 |
| UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot                                                        |  7996 |
| UniProtKB generic accession number (TrEMBL or SwissProt not differentiated) | 76238 |
| UniProtKB Gene Name                                                         | 62300 |
| RNAcentral                                                                  | 11244 |
| UniProtKB isoform                                                           |   144 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------+
6 rows in set (0.369 sec)
```

Let's see if we get similar results using version 114.

```mysql
use rattus_norvegicus_core_114_1;
select external_db.db_display_name, count(external_db.db_display_name) as total from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id join external_db on xref.external_db_id = external_db.external_db_id group by external_db.external_db_id;
```
```
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| db_display_name                                                             | total  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| InterPro                                                                    | 167744 |
| UniProtKB/TrEMBL                                                            | 130525 |
| UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot                                                        |  32202 |
| UniProtKB generic accession number (TrEMBL or SwissProt not differentiated) | 123811 |
| RNAcentral                                                                  |  10972 |
| UniProtKB isoform                                                           |    146 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
6 rows in set (0.563 sec)
```

Hmmmm.....

Commit message:

Note on updated rat reference in Ensembl 114

README.md, after:

# Ensembl public databases

Typically one wouldn't need to delve into the innards of the [Ensembl public MySQL Servers](https://www.ensembl.org/info/data/mysql.html?redirect=no) because it's much easier to use Biomart. It also requires understanding the [database schema](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/api/core/core_schema.html), which is not that straightforward. However, Biomart is sometimes unreachable and/or does not work as expected. A deeper understanding of the Ensembl public databases can help in those cases since we can directly retrieve the data we want from the databases. Given my reliance on Ensembl, it is a worthwhile endeavour to try to understand the backend of Ensembl.

# Setup

On Debian 12, I wasn't sure which package to install so I made an initial search.

```console
sudo apt update
sudo apt search mysql > blah

# after looking through blah
sudo apt install -y default-mysql-client
mysql --version
```
```
mysql  Ver 15.1 Distrib 10.11.13-MariaDB, for debian-linux-gnu (x86_64) using  EditLine wrapper
```

In case you were wondering about the compatibility between MariaDB and MySQL, at least the [client protocol](https://mariadb.com/docs/release-notes/compatibility-and-differences/mariadb-vs-mysql-compatibility) is binary compatible.

Get all the databases as a test.

```console
mysql --user=anonymous --host=ensembldb.ensembl.org -A -e "show databases;" > ensembldb_databases.txt
cat ensembldb_databases.txt| wc -l
```
```
24290
```

# Rattus norvegicus

This work was motivated by the fact that the Ensembl version 113 archive does not contain rat references, which means I can't use Biomart. Looking through `ensembldb_databases.txt`, the database I need is `rattus_norvegicus_core_113_72`. I need a single lookup table that connects Ensembl gene IDs with their associated Gene Ontology terms. Looking through the schema, it seems the table that I need is [ontology_xref](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/api/core/core_schema.html#ontology_xref).

* This table associates Evidence Tags to the relationship between EnsEMBL objects and ontology accessions (primarily GO accessions).
* The relationship to GO that is stored in the database is actually derived through the relationship of EnsEMBL peptides to SwissProt peptides, i.e. the relationship is derived like this: ENSP -> SWISSPROT -> GO And the evidence tag describes the relationship between the SwissProt Peptide and the GO entry.
* In reality, however, we store this in the database like this: ENSP -> SWISSPROT ENSP -> GO and the evidence tag hangs off of the relationship between the ENSP and the GO identifier.
* Some ENSPs are associated with multiple closely related Swissprot entries which may both be associated with the same GO identifier but with different evidence tags.
* For this reason a single Ensembl - external db object relationship in the object_xref table can be associated with multiple evidence tags in the ontology_xref table.

```console
mysql --user=anonymous --host=ensembldb.ensembl.org -A
```
```mysql
use rattus_norvegicus_core_113_72;
select * from ontology_xref limit 5;
```
```
+----------------+----------------+--------------+
| object_xref_id | source_xref_id | linkage_type |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+
|       11895259 |        4650749 | IDA          |
|       11895260 |        4650749 | IEA          |
|       11895261 |        4646135 | IEA          |
|       11895262 |        4646135 | IEA          |
|       11895263 |        4653274 | IEA          |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+
5 rows in set (0.868 sec)
```

* `object_xref_id` - Composite key. Foreign key references to the `object_xref` table.
* `source_xref_id` - Composite key. Foreign key references to the `xref` table.

Join with `object_xref`.

```mysql
select * from ontology_xref join object_xref on ontology_xref.object_xref_id = object_xref.object_xref_id limit 5;
```
```
+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+------------+---------------------+---------+--------------------+-------------+
| object_xref_id | source_xref_id | linkage_type | object_xref_id | ensembl_id | ensembl_object_type | xref_id | linkage_annotation | analysis_id |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+------------+---------------------+---------+--------------------+-------------+
|       11895259 |        4650749 | IDA          |       11895259 |      36056 | Transcript          |  861201 | IDA                |         153 |
|       11895260 |        4650749 | IEA          |       11895260 |      36056 | Transcript          | 1711926 | IEA                |         153 |
|       11895261 |        4646135 | IEA          |       11895261 |       1754 | Transcript          | 1711880 | IEA                |         153 |
|       11895262 |        4646135 | IEA          |       11895262 |       1754 | Transcript          | 1711881 | IEA                |         153 |
|       11895263 |        4653274 | IEA          |       11895263 |      54956 | Transcript          | 1711882 | IEA                |         153 |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+------------+---------------------+---------+--------------------+-------------+
5 rows in set (0.282 sec)
```

Join with `xref`.

```mysql
select * from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id limit 5;
```
```
+----------------+----------------+--------------+---------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
| object_xref_id | source_xref_id | linkage_type | xref_id | external_db_id | dbprimary_acc | display_label | version | description | info_type | info_text |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+---------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
|       11895259 |        4650749 | IDA          | 4650749 |          50817 | URS0000013967 | URS0000013967 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
|       11895260 |        4650749 | IEA          | 4650749 |          50817 | URS0000013967 | URS0000013967 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
|       11895261 |        4646135 | IEA          | 4646135 |          50817 | URS0000060CC3 | URS0000060CC3 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
|       11895262 |        4646135 | IEA          | 4646135 |          50817 | URS0000060CC3 | URS0000060CC3 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
|       11895263 |        4653274 | IEA          | 4653274 |          50817 | URS000007B8A8 | URS000007B8A8 | 1       | NULL        | CHECKSUM  |           |
+----------------+----------------+--------------+---------+----------------+---------------+---------------+---------+-------------+-----------+-----------+
5 rows in set (0.367 sec)
```

I'm not familiar with `URS` IDs, let's check the `external_db` table to see what they are.

```mysql
select * from external_db where external_db_id = 50817;
```
```
+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------+
| external_db_id | db_name    | db_release | status    | priority | db_display_name | type               | secondary_db_name | secondary_db_table | description                         |
+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------+
|          50817 | RNAcentral | NULL       | KNOWNXREF |        0 | RNAcentral      | PRIMARY_DB_SYNONYM | NULL              | NULL               | Sequence identity to RNAcentral ids |
+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------+
1 row in set (0.310 sec)
```

Looking online I found [RNAcentral: The non-coding RNA sequence database](https://rnacentral.org/); let's tally all the external databases.

First count all entries (as I'm not confident with my SQL skills).

```mysql
select count(*) as total from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id;
```
```
+--------+
| total  |
+--------+
| 164031 |
+--------+
1 row in set (0.292 sec)
```

Tally.

```mysql
select xref.external_db_id, count(xref.external_db_id) as total from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id group by xref.external_db_id;
```
```
+----------------+-------+
| external_db_id | total |
+----------------+-------+
|           2000 |  6109 |
|           2200 |  7996 |
|           2250 | 76238 |
|          50621 | 62300 |
|          50817 | 11244 |
|          50869 |   144 |
+----------------+-------+
6 rows in set (0.345 sec)
```

Double-check the total.

```console
echo $(( 6109+7996+76238+62300+11244+144 ))
```
```
164031
```

Join on `external_db` so we have the actual names of the databases.

```mysql
select external_db.db_display_name, count(external_db.db_display_name) as total from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id join external_db on xref.external_db_id = external_db.external_db_id group by external_db.external_db_id;
```
```
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------+
| db_display_name                                                             | total |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------+
| UniProtKB/TrEMBL                                                            |  6109 |
| UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot                                                        |  7996 |
| UniProtKB generic accession number (TrEMBL or SwissProt not differentiated) | 76238 |
| UniProtKB Gene Name                                                         | 62300 |
| RNAcentral                                                                  | 11244 |
| UniProtKB isoform                                                           |   144 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------+
6 rows in set (0.369 sec)
```

Let's see if we get similar results using version 114.

```mysql
use rattus_norvegicus_core_114_1;
select external_db.db_display_name, count(external_db.db_display_name) as total from ontology_xref join xref on ontology_xref.source_xref_id = xref.xref_id join external_db on xref.external_db_id = external_db.external_db_id group by external_db.external_db_id;
```
```
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| db_display_name                                                             | total  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| InterPro                                                                    | 167744 |
| UniProtKB/TrEMBL                                                            | 130525 |
| UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot                                                        |  32202 |
| UniProtKB generic accession number (TrEMBL or SwissProt not differentiated) | 123811 |
| RNAcentral                                                                  |  10972 |
| UniProtKB isoform                                                           |    146 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
6 rows in set (0.563 sec)
```

Looking at the [Ensembl 114 has been released! blog post](https://www.ensembl.info/2025/05/07/ensembl-114-has-been-released/) the large difference in numbers may be due to:

> Updated Rat reference (GRCr8 automated annotation)
>     Rattus norvegicus (GRCr8)
